hi I myself am vegan and in this video
I'm gonna talk about a set of critiques
directed toward veganism sometimes from
the inside and sometimes from the
outside so these are issues that are
sometimes confronting vegans from non
vegans sometimes they're presented as
excuses for why people aren't vegan or
they're given as a political rationale
for why veganism is inadequate or
immoral or bad and sometimes they're
engaged with those issues inside
veganism for people who I would say
generally are trying to transform
veganism into more of a politically
engaged movement or people who want to
impose a certain framework of social
issues on to veganism in directing the
movement forward with different motives
as always vegans are at averse Bunch
it's really misleading to characterize
any one set of political motives we're
talking about veganism um one format
that you encounter this in is in terms
of capitalism and anti capitalism or
consumerism and anti-consumerism so
under this heading
vegans are reproached as merely
presenting a set of lifestyle choices a
set of consumerist options within a
consumerist system and failing to
challenge that system so under this
heading veganism is then replies reviled
for not being anti-capitalist or not
being anti-capitalist enough that
veganism is not revolutionary or not
revolutionary enough and that veganism
does not challenge all oppression
doesn't challenge all forms of human
oppression such as racism exploitation
of the poor etc now one reason why this
critique is not going to go away I think
it's still going to be talked about ten
years from now is that it's right on a
simple factual level yeah veganism is
not a revolutionary movement I also
think that quitting smoking is not a
revolutionary movement even the
abolition of slavery is
historically and you can look around the
world in many social contexts even
though it transformed society in a
fundamental way was not a revolutionary
movement the abolition of slavery in
Thailand took place under royal
patronage from the top down not from the
bottom up that wasn't a grassroots
movement it wasn't a slave rebellion etc
the abolition of slavery in Sri Lanka
took place under the British Empire from
the top down it was imposed on the
society not as a grassroots movement not
as a rebellion etc so history is full of
these funny things but you know people
don't quit smoking as a method of
radicalization or revolution they quit
smoking with whatever mix of motives
health concerns and trying to live a
meaningful life and so on and a lot of
people both today and in the future are
going to engage with veganism in that
same way whether you like it or not I've
heard many people complain that they
feel insulted when veganism is referred
to as a diet well most people eat three
meals a day they may go to one political
protest a month they may go to one
political protest a week but political
activism is gonna be a smaller part of
their daily life than their diet they
are gonna buy things they are going to
continue to be consumers and consumerism
is going to be part of their daily life
even if they define themselves as being
anti-consumerist anti-capitalist
minimalist revolutionary you name it and
the other broad concern I have as I've
already stated in previous videos is
that if you believe in veganism then you
believe that veganism is for everybody
and in that sense it really is like
quitting smoking if you think that
cigarettes are unhealthy cigarettes are
bad for you then you believe that
quitting smoking is for everybody not
just left-wing people not just
right-wing people not just people who
agree with your particular set of
priorities and concerns and within
veganism I say this with all due
humility all of us individually it's
hard to find it in your heart to get
along with other people who are vegan
who fundamentally disagree with you who
fundamentally don't get along with you
politically religiously
or otherwise I already mentioned you
know it's hard if you find out Bill
Clinton is vegan if you find out George
Bush is vegan if you find out that
somebody you knew in high school whom
you hate it just on a personal level you
hated them in high school and now today
you happen to see their face on the
internet and you find out they've gone
vegan do you have it in your heart to
send them a message and say hey I'm so
happy for you I'm so glad you became
vegan do you have it in your heart to
work with them in a political movement
to bridge those differences it's tough
it's tough for everyone it's tough for
me I personally I have a really robust
background related to Buddhism like you
know the real history of Buddhism the
real textual basis for Buddhist
philosophy a sort of horror social
science approach to the reality of life
in Buddhist cultures not a rose-colored
glasses approach of glorifying Buddhism
well when I meet other vegans who
believe in a kind of mishmash of Eastern
religions kind of picking and choosing
here and there from really bad
translations into English of Buddhist
ideas taken out of context and horribly
misrepresented and misinterpreted for me
personally it's really hard to sit at
the same table with someone like that I
it's really hard for me to get along
with somebody who believes in a sort of
air SATs pick and choose combination of
elements of what they learned from their
yoga classes and some book they bought
at an airport about Buddhism that's hard
for me personally okay for someone else
who's on the far left it's gonna be hard
dealing with someone who politically is
even a centrist someone who's like a
mainstream member of the Democrat Party
the Republican Party these clashes are
gonna exist within Buddhism and in that
sense sorry I said Buddhism I met
veganism both are true these clashes can
exist that veganism and in that sense
you can compare veganism to the struggle
to try to make a coherent social
movement out of protests against
nuclear power protests against
particular ecological disasters you know
when there's a toxic waste site well
it's not just left-wing people who are
upset about it you might have right-wing
people you might have people who are
traditional hunters and then trying to
work together but I mean the strength in
any political movement comes from that
ability to work together not the ability
to isolate yourself into a smaller and
smaller group of people who agree with
you
ideologically and who don't challenge
your preconceptions to give one one
example that again it's visceral it's
hard to cope with anyone's reaction
maybe extreme vegans by and large
support the complete abolition of
vivisection of testing on animals if you
want to know anything about what's
really going on in vivisection for your
source information you tend to rely on
moderate scientists scientists who want
to see vivisection used sparingly and
occasionally but scientists who are
critical of the waste of money waste of
resources and needless animal suffering
under the current regime of how
scientific research is funded so I mean
I have read some articles that were
really illuminating from this type of
moderate scientist who doesn't want to
end vivisection totally but he was
skeptical of and critical of what's
going on in to the section where they
get into the details of some horrendous
projects where you know sheep were
tortured to death for no reason and the
way the study was designed it couldn't
have possibly learned anything it just
tortured these sheep to death and those
scientists are asked the question look
we supposedly have a government process
in place that evaluates these proposals
in terms of their possible positive
outcomes the animal suffering and the
use of resources and obviously that
system doesn't work if projects like
this are going ahead I've also read some
you know terrible descriptions of
experiments where monkeys were being
tortured to death and the project could
not have possibly discovered anything
these monkeys were really being tortured
to death for no reason and the
scientists involved even quoted from the
solution written by the researchers
themselves people who supported this
vivisection and you know they were
saying they were admitting in their
conclusions that what they found by
torturing these monkeys had absolutely
no salience to human health or human
psychology or anything else okay if you
want to make progress in that area you
may think that strength comes from
radicalism or extremism or trying to
isolate yourself in a small group of
hardcore activists who agree with your
narrowly defined abolitionist approach
but it doesn't strength will necessarily
come from working across that bridge
with in this case moderate scientists
who disagree with you to some extent but
who sympathize with and support the
critique you're engaged in for their own
reasons they're probably people who want
to see a much smaller number of animals
being vivisected but they are aware from
the inside of how the grant application
process works of how the scientific
establishment the university
establishment academics out how that
operates and those are the people who
will tell you the details of how you
know monkeys are abducted from the
jungle in Cambodia the last inch of
jungle being cut down are put on
airplanes and are sent to England and
how the commercial airline companies are
protesting against that because they
don't want to be involved in tor in
transporting these monkeys to be
tortured to death in labs you know
those technical details will really
inform your activism it will inform your
engagement issue may transform your life
philosophically to but if you want to
make an effective difference those are
exactly the details you need to know
those are the people you need to work
with even if they disagree with you okay
so strength is not gonna come from
isolating yourself in a narrow but deep
group of people who don't challenge your
own assumptions your own ideology
okay I've told you what I'm talking
about and I've told you why I'm talking
about it now I'm going to respond to a
particular voice here on YouTube who is
a vegan criticizing veganism from the
inside she uses the online name a
privileged vegan and as that name
suggests she is framing her age with
these issues in terms of privilege and
veganism she gets a lot of negative
reactions um and you know she has her
own critiques of other vegans online
because that issue of privileged vegans
are primarily used to hearing it in
terms of a set of excuses for why people
don't go vegan why people refuse to
become vegan why they would prefer to
maintain their own cultural heritage
their own traditions or what have you
now she is not using it as such an
excuse she's engaging in a very
different kind of social critique but
nevertheless that explains the sort of
hostility and reluctance of other vegans
to hear what she has to say I'm gonna
provide a link below this video to the
particular video she posted the
particular video at a privileged vegan
and I'm responding to here however what
I have to say you'll be able to
understand fine if you've never seen
that video or if that video is deleted
in the future it doesn't exist or what
have you
um now again the particular video I'm
choosing to respond to here I chose it
because I think it's worth talking about
I didn't choose the worst video or a
video that I thought was stupid or
pointless I think these are important
issues to talk about and I can
sympathize where she's with where this
person is coming from in launching these
critiques of veganism um and I think
this raises a bunch of problems that are
not going to disappear however I've
already stated my own bias and my bias
is that we have to learn to work
together we have to learn to bridge the
types of terrible differences that
separate us and isolate us as vegans and
that there is no utility in trying to
instead deepen and retrench those
differences to create mutually hateful
invidious cliques within veganism and
one of the reasons that goes on is that
it's human nature left to their own
devices you
we'll just organize themselves that way
especially in contacts where they're not
making any money that's kind of a whole
nother digression
why why does veganism look the way it
does in the internet for 90% of the
stuff it's the profit motive there's
such a difference if you compare the web
presence the YouTube channels the
statements the written text of groups
that are making money versus groups that
are not making money the groups that are
making money of course we get all of
this shallow stuff how to lose weight
how to have a great looking ass how to
clear up your acne how to live a life of
plenty and abundance and the power of
positive thinking all kinds of nonsense
all right that's one side but amongst
those who are definitely not making any
money you know there's a small activist
group called London vegan actions they
look like a pretty coherent group of
friends they were founded by two sisters
who've been interviewed on the news and
who have been written about multiple
times and you know for them I'd assume
like any small group like that they're
not looking to recruit hundreds of
people or thousands of people they want
to work with and spend time with
like-minded people and that's not a
criticism that's human nature like when
I was doing activism at City Hall if I'm
getting involved in long term activism
of any kind on an issue if you're gonna
work for years on a small scale with a
group of friends in a political issue
where you're never gonna make any money
there's no fame there's no other reward
for most people the reward they want is
exactly to work with like-minded people
so doesn't always come from a bad place
in their hearts but yeah I mean this is
the kind of fundamental problem that can
lead to veganism discrediting itself and
veganism tearing itself apart and it's
also underlying what we see here are now
in terms of the status quo so within the
first minute of this video I'm
responding to the author sets out the
view that there is a problem with
digital vegans with vegans online
stating or believing that veganism is an
objective that justifies the means any
means used to get to it
now that is an interesting point it's an
interesting point to open her video on
but I'm disappointed that she raises
this point only in relation to what she
feels are offensive objectification of
women's bodies offensive use of language
basically shallow and dasu P material
within veganism online you know posting
up stuff about who's fat and who's thin
Oh to the local tabloids all of that
deserves to be critiqued sure engage in
a critique of it let's try to make
veganism more meaningful fine completely
agree however when I heard our opening
the video that way she's talking about
the ends justifying the means I'm
worried about eco-terrorism I'm worried
about vegans who actively glorify
violence illegal sabotage illegal action
burning things down
smashing cages etc as their primary mode
of activism so the problem of the ends
justifying the means is very real and
veganism but let's get real the problem
is not somebody making a comment on
Twitter that offends you slope the
problem is the primacy of anarchists and
communists and you know balaclava
wearing sudo radicals really glorifying
violence and the number of people
actually engage in that kind of violence
is a very very small percentage of the
people who come on the internet and try
to glorify it try to applaud it okay
that does discredit veganism and it's a
short-term and long-term problem an
issue we're all gonna be stuck with and
if you go to City Hall or you go to
Parliament wherever you live yes
you know the shadow of violence
anarchist activism can discredit and
hangover whatever positive changes
you're trying to make the other stuff
you know the photographs of women in
bikinis all the kind of shallow and
catty remarks yeah it's also an issue
they can also discredit veganism to sort
of then the critique of that and
complaints against that
is also legit but yeah in terms of
gravity and seriousness of the
particular issue raised here of the ants
justifying the means that's not my
primary concern that's not the first
thing that pops into my head so she goes
on in her second minute to raise the
question of making the world vegan can
this happen on its own is this viable as
a single issue cause or is veganism
ineluctably bound to other social issues
challenges raised against other forms of
structural oppression etc etc well like
it or not
yes veganism can and will be pursued as
a single issue cause yes you know
everyone in the world can quit smoking
theoretically without any other social
problems being solved I may not like it
I may prefer to imagine that veganism is
linked to a long list of social issues I
personally happen to care about but know
as a praxis it isn't and inevitably it's
going to continue to be pursued as an
isolated single issue caused by a great
diversity of people with a great
diversity of political and religious
beliefs and so on so in terms of working
pragmatically with the world as it
really exists that's something we all
have to face up to if there were a
neo-nazi group on the internet who were
promoting veganism that would be a
problem but they were probably already
are I just don't know about them
probably that already exists you know
there are cult groups with you know
ridiculous supernatural beliefs who are
promoting veganism and divine them
define themselves in terms of veganism
the association of veganism with
breatharianism other supernatural diets
diet beliefs and ideas of spiritual
purity and so on yeah
it's a problem that we all have to deal
with but for that reason it's really a
good thing that veganism is separable as
a single issue it's really a political
advantage for us that we can abstract or
extract veganism from that context and
say
look I understand you or this group of
people you're vegan because of a
religious or cultural background I
understand you're vegan and you
associated with these beliefs and
another group of people associate
veganism with a set of political beliefs
but guess what we can deal with this as
a single issue not to further divide us
but to give us some common ground to to
work on she raises the question then
she's challenging vegans in her second
minute of her video do we expect
veganism to magically rebalance the
damaging attitudes that we profited from
along the way so that quotation and that
paraphrase it doesn't make it clear what
she's saying but she's raising here a
meaningful question of if we have vegans
believing that the ends justify the
means if we have vegans who are engaging
in crass consumerism and capitalism who
are engaging in possibly racism sexism
the objectification of women a long list
of things she thinks are politically
offensive if we are looking at a form of
veganism that profits that actually gets
attention and sells diet books or you
know it makes its money from these from
these things do we think that veganism
will rebalance itself at the end of that
process from what came along the way I
do think that is really an interesting
question and it applies to some aspects
of veganism more than others those two
sisters in England who started London
vegan actions I don't think that
critique applies to them they're going
out in the streets and protesting in
front of restaurants try to get them to
stop serving foie gras very simple
down-to-earth activism they have
different ways of kind of showing the
vegan documentaries Earthlings and
getting people aware of the issues very
simple awareness week raising street
protests and and that sort of thing I
don't think and you know and I don't
think they're making any money I don't
think they're commercializing anything
so no in that case you know that
critique doesn't apply to them and I
think it's important to recognize
there's a spectrum of things out there
that are that are there to be criticized
however yeah when we talk about
commercialized veganism this reminds me
a lot of debates from a few years ago
about commercialized rap commercialized
hip-hop where many people felt that rap
music was supposed to have a sort of
socially conscious core to it that it
was supposed to relate to and connect to
activism and anti-establishment
sentiments in a deep and fundamental way
and then as hip-hop both became more
commercialized and more gangster in its
content and as it came to really exploit
not just images of violence but images
of sexuality even rape and what-have-you
in lyrics many people raised the
question look isn't rap going to
discredit itself as a genre or as an art
form and to use the same language this
video is it going to be able to recover
its image or rebalance at the end of
that process so rap music in the last
few decades a lot of people made money
out of it some people made thousands of
dollars some people made millions of
dollars and the commercialization of the
music went the way it did
for that reason but yeah there is a long
term impact there are long-term
repercussions and effects I don't think
rap music will ever be respected in the
way jazz music is or in the way blues
music is even though the majority if you
look at the lyrical content I mean there
are blues songs about cocaine there are
blues songs about getting drunk
there are blues songs about husbands
beating up their wives or wife speeding
up their husbands like you know a whole
the whole range of human misery is in
blues music and jazz music also however
I think anyone who followed what
happened with rap music within my
lifetime would say honestly yeah you
know what the commercial is
nation of rap and the prevalence of
certain kinds of violence themes in rap
yeah that does mean that it's not gonna
be respected in the way jazz music is so
okay the thematic content of veganism
today whether it's the one extreme of
have a beachbody go on vacation in
Thailand live a life of indulgence and
you know athleticism yeah that's gonna
have repercussions for how veganism is
perceived on the other end you know
violent movements it's gonna have
repercussions and I remain really
concerned some of the most popular and
influential forms of vegan organizations
you can are not dealt with by this
particular person responded not dealt
with by a privileged vegan worldwide
probably the most vocal most successful
vegan organization is run by supreme
master Ching hai who has a TV network
called supreme master TV they promote
veganism they owned the largest chain of
vegan restaurants in the world they have
this TV station that promotes veganism
directly in connection with ecological
issues with anti-war and anti-violence
issues a lot of that may tug your
heartstrings in many ways but they are
also a you know a fringe religious group
a new religious movement with
supernatural and cultic beliefs that are
to me shameful that discredit them as a
movement and I'm worried about their
success discrediting veganism as a
movement I'm worried that when I meet
people in real life and I say I'm vegan
they look at me and think this guy is a
member of some kind of funny cult that
believes in all kinds of crazy
supernatural stuff so yes you know that
is a problem
veganism will be damaged by the
attitudes that it has profited from
exploiting along the way commercially
politically and otherwise so far pretty
much everything I've said would seem to
be in agreement with
the person whose work I'm criticizing
the other video that I'm linking to
below however I think that the person
who made that video would not feel that
I'm agreeing with her because the
examples I'm offering the questions I'm
raising and my political concerns are so
different from hers so she's very
concerned about for example a certain
YouTube personality who is a former
bodybuilder whose videos she finds very
offensive he's actually here in Canada
his name is vegan gains okay so that's
very different from the concerns I've
been raising and in the third minute of
her video she makes the claim that how
we shape the vegan message will both
impact who the message reaches and which
inequalities it reproduces so slipped in
here in passing is the idea that simply
by addressing the issues in what she
considers a politically incorrect way we
are reproducing social inequality so
that's a hell of a claim to make in
passing if you believe veganism is for
everybody then you believe it's all
kinds of different people you believe
it's for athletes you believe it's there
people who watch football on the
weekends it's not me I've never watched
kicking football of my life I've never
watched a game of ice hockey in my life
okay um I'm a bookish intellectual you
know I represent a very tiny minority of
the population in Canada I don't fit
into my own culture very well at all and
there's no false humility about that
it's the way it is shaping the vegan
message in different ways will reach
different audiences but I regard that as
a fundamentally positive thing the fact
that I may recoil in horror at what
vegan athletes have to say is one thing
but I'm not the audience for that so
I've got to have some degree of humility
in engaging with people who come from
those
other backgrounds again hey we can all
benefit from critique there's nothing
wrong with that but boy to leap from
that claim to the idea that someone is
guilty of reproducing social inequality
because their approach to veganism is
not the same of mind that's a huge leap
of inference that would need more
explaining and more evidence and you
know I don't buy it I don't think that
vegan gains is reproducing social
inequality in trying to make money out
of putting offensive videos on the
internet he's not the first to do it and
he's not the last to do it a lot of
people want to be an all voluntary
to draw attention to themselves and
there may not be a lot more to it than
that if you want to critique him for
being shallow or offensive fine if you
want to critique him for reproducing
social inequality good luck at the three
minute mark still she suggests in her
video quote shouldn't the learning
process to become vegan also teach
people to think critically about other
forms of oppression that affect humans
close quote ok well that's a question
the real world answer like it or not is
no the most successful forms of veganism
right now or either completely motivated
by superstition various religious
movements in Asia and attempts to
imitate them in the Western world and on
the other hand we have this phenomenon
of veganism being motivated by vanity
that both of us are offering some kind
of constructive criticism of veganism in
order to make you more beautiful fit
into a bikini ride a bicycle up and down
a mountain in Thailand all the rest of
it so for the majority of people who
actually are vegan in the world the
learning process to become vegan
probably is related to a magical idea of
karma in both Chinese culture and Indian
culture sometimes catalyzed by a modern
awareness that milk products really do
entail bad karma whereas traditionally
they were believed not to and this is
sometimes linked
you oppressive ideas of caste purity
that your social superiority is linked
to your diet sometimes very directly
linked to beliefs about an afterlife or
reincarnation that you're gonna go to
the seventh heaven after you die instead
of the fifth heaven etc if you adopt
certain dietary practices purity rituals
and so on okay so no people are becoming
vegan without any connection to the
issues of oppression that you personally
may really care about that may be sad
you may not like it but that is the
reality we have to work with
pragmatically in the year 2015 you may
want to believe that veganism is
inherently about compassion as you
define it you may want to believe that
veganism is inherently about
anti-capitalism anti-consumerism
or some revolutionary cause as you
define it it's not and also you don't
get to define it and neither do i and
strength in any political movement
especially a political movement as tiny
as what veganism is in the year 2015
it's never going to come from building
up those invidious walls of division
between you and the only other people
who could possibly have a common cause
with you who could possibly support you
and appreciate your work on YouTube work
with you in real life start a foundation
start an NGO start writing letters to
Parliament start taking a case to City
Hall
whatever the cause is man the only
strength and the only momentum you're
going to get is going to be from
learning to work with people across
those divides